Amplification of TGFb Induced ITGB6 Gene Transcription May Promote Pulmonary Fibrosis. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a devastating, progressive disease with poor survival rates and limited treatment options. Upregulation of avb6 integrins within the alveolar epithelial cells is a characteristic feature of IPF and correlates with poor patient survival. The pro-fibrotic cytokine TGFb1 can upregulate avb6 integrin expression but the molecular mechanisms driving this effect have not previously been elucidated. We confirm that stimulation with exogenous TGFb1 increases expression of the integrin b6 subunit gene (ITGB6) and avb6 integrin cell surface expression in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. TGFb1-induced ITGB6 expression occurs via transcriptional activation of the ITGB6 gene, but does not result from effects on ITGB6 mRNA stability. Basal expression of ITGB6 in, and avb6 integrins on, lung epithelial cells occurs via homeostatic avb6-mediated TGFb1 activation in the absence of exogenous stimulation, and can be amplified by TGFb1 activation. Fundamentally, we show for the first time that TGFb1-induced ITGB6 expression occurs via canonical Smad signalling since dominant negative constructs directed against Smad3 and 4 inhibit ITGB6 transcriptional activity. Furthermore, disruption of a Smad binding site at -798 in the ITGB6 promoter abolishes TGFb1-induced ITGB6 transcriptional activity. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation we demonstrate that TGFb1 stimulation of lung epithelial cells results in direct binding of Smad3, and Smad4, to the ITGB6 gene promoter within this region. Finally, using an adenoviral TGFb1 over-expression model of pulmonary fibrosis we demonstrate that Smad3 is crucial for TGFb1-induced avb6 integrin expression within the alveolar epithelium in vivo. Together, these data confirm that a homeostatic, autocrine loop of avb6 integrin activated TGFb1-induced ITGB6 gene expression regulates epithelial basal avb6 integrin expression, and demonstrates that this occurs via Smad-dependent transcriptional regulation at a single Smad binding site in the promoter of the b6 subunit gene. Active TGFb1 amplifies this pathway both in vitro and in vivo, which may promote fibrosis.
