Tubastatin ameliorates pulmonary fibrosis by targeting the TGFb-PI3K-Akt pathway. BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic, progressive and fatal disease. Histone-deacetylase-6 (HDAC6) alters function and fate of various proteins via deacetylation of lysine residues, and is implicated in TGF-b1-induced EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition). However, the role of HDAC6 in pulmonary fibrosis is unknown. METHODS: HDAC6 expression in IPF and control lungs was assessed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and immunoblots. Lung fibroblasts were treated with TGF-b1    HDAC6 inhibitors (Tubacin, Tubastatin, ACY1215, or MC1568), and fibrotic markers such as type I collagen were assessed using qRT-PCR and immunoblots. Mice were treated with bleomycin (oropharyngeal aspiration; single dose)    Tubastatin (intraperitoneally injection; daily for 21 days), and lung collagen expression was gauged using immunoblots and trichrome staining. In a separate experiment, HDAC6 wild-type (WT) and knockout (KO) mice were administered bleomycin, and lungs were evaluated in the same manner. RESULTS: HDAC6 expression was deregulated in IPF lungs. Among the HDAC6 inhibitors tested, only Tubastatin significantly repressed TGF-b1-induced expression of type-1 collagen in lung fibroblasts, and this finding was coupled with decreased Akt phosphorylation and increased Akt-PHLPP (PH domain and Leucine rich repeat Protein Phosphatase) association. Tubastatin repressed TGF-b1-induced S6K phosphorylation, HIF-1a expression, and VEGF expression. Tubastatin also repressed TGF-b1-induced inhibition of LC3B-II (a marker of autophagosome formation). In bleomycin-treated mouse lungs, HDAC6 expression was increased, and Tubastatin repressed type-1 collagen expression. However, in HDAC6 KO mice, bleomycin-induced type-1 collagen expression was not repressed compared to WT mice. Knockdown of HDAC6, as well as HDAC10, another potential Tubastatin target, did not inhibit TGF-b1-induced collagen expression in lung fibroblasts. CONCLUSIONS: HDAC6 expression is altered during lung fibrogenesis. Tubastatin represses TGF-b1-induced collagen expression, by diminishing Akt phosphorylation and regulating downstream targets such as HIF-1a-VEGF axis and autophagy. Tubastatin-treated WT mice are protected against bleomycin-induced fibrosis, but HDAC6 KO mice are not. Our data suggest that Tubastatin ameliorates pulmonary fibrosis, by targeting the TGFb-PI3K-Akt pathway, likely via an HDAC6-independent mechanism.
