The JAK2 pathway is activated in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is the most rapidly progressive and fatal fibrotic disorder, with no curative therapies. The signal-transducer-and-activator-of-transcription-3 (STAT3) protein is activated in lung fibroblasts and alveolar type II cells (ATII), thereby contributing to lung fibrosis in IPF. Although activation of Janus-kinase-2 (JAK2) has been implicated in proliferative disorders, its role in IPF is unknown. The aim of this study was to analyze JAK2 activation in IPF, and to determine whether JAK2/STAT3 inhibition is a potential therapeutic strategy for this disease. METHODS AND RESULTS: JAK2/p-JAK2 and STAT3/pSTAT3 expression was evaluated using quantitative real time-PCR, western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. Compared to human healthy lung tissue (n   =   10) both proteins were upregulated in the lung tissue of IPF patients (n   =   12). Stimulating primary ATII and lung fibroblasts with transforming-growth-factor-beta-1 or interleukin (IL)-6/IL-13 activated JAK2 and STAT3, inducing epithelial to mesenchymal and fibroblast to myofibroblast transitions. Dual p-JAK2/p-STAT3 inhibition with JSI-124 or silencing of JAK2 and STAT3 genes suppressed ATII and the fibroblast to myofibroblast transition, with greater effects than the sum of those obtained using JAK2 or STAT3 inhibitors individually. Dual rather than single inhibition was also more effective for inhibiting fibroblast migration, preventing increases in fibroblast senescence and Bcl-2 expression, and ameliorating impaired autophagy. In rats administered JSI-124, a dual inhibitor of p-JAK2/p-STAT3, at a dose of 1  mg/kg/day, bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis was reduced and collagen deposition in the lung was inhibited, as were JAK2 and STAT3 activation and several markers of fibrosis, autophagy, senescence, and anti-apoptosis. CONCLUSIONS: JAK2 and STAT3 are activated in IPF, and their dual inhibition may be an attractive strategy for treating this disease.
