Human placental mesenchymal stem cells of fetal origins-alleviated inflammation and fibrosis by attenuating MyD88 signaling in bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis mice. Pulmonary fibrosis is a progressive lung disease that its pathogenic mechanism currently is incompletely understood. Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling has recently been identified as a regulator of inflammation and pulmonary fibrosis. In addition, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) of different origins offer a great promise in treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). However mechanisms of pathogenic roles of TLR signaling and therapeutic effects of MSCs in the IPF remain elusive. In present study, the involvement of TLR signaling and the therapeutic role of MSCs were interrogated in MyD88-deficient mice using human placental MSCs of fetal origins (hfPMSCs). The results showed an alleviated pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis in myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88)-deficient mice treated with bleomycin (BLM), accompanied with a reduced TGF-b signaling and production of pro-fibrotic cytokines, including TNF-a, IL-1b. An exposure of HLF1 lung fibroblasts, A549 epithelial cells and RAW264.7 macrophages to BLM led an increased expression of key components of MyD88 and TGF-b signaling cascades. Of interest, enforced expression and inhibition of MyD88 protein resulted in an enhanced and a reduced TGF-b signaling in above cells in the presence of BLM, respectively. However, the addition of TGF-b1 showed a marginally inhibitory effect on MyD88 signaling in these cells in the absence of BLM. Importantly, the administration of hfPMSCs could significantly attenuate BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice, along with a reduced hydroxyproline (HYP) deposition, MyD88 and TGF-b signaling activation, and production of pro-fibrotic cytokines. These results may suggest an importance of MyD88/TGF-b signaling axis in the tissue homeostasis and functional integrity of lung in response to injury, which may offer a novel target for treatment of pulmonary fibrosis.