Titration of non-replicating adenovirus as a vector for transducing active TGF-beta1 gene expression causing inflammation and fibrogenesis in the lungs of C57BL/6 mice. Investigators have shown that interstitial pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) can be induced in rats by overexpressing transforming-growth-factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) through a replication-deficient recombinant adenovirus vector instilled into the lungs (Sime et al. 1997). We have shown that this vector induces IPF in fibrogenic-resistant tumour necrosis factor alpha-receptor knockout (TNF-alphaRKO) mice (Liu et al. 2001). The object of our studies is to understand how peptide growth factors, such as TGF-beta1, mediate interstitial lung disease (ILD). To do so, we must be able to manipulate the dose of the factor and sort out its effects on multiple other mediators in the lung parenchyma. As a step in this complex process, in the studies reported here, we have determined the concentrations of the recombinant adenovirus vector carrying the gene for porcine active TGF-beta1 (AVTGFbeta1) that have little apparent effect, cause clear induction of disease, or severe disease. The disease largely resolves by 28 days in all cases, thus providing a valuable model to understand the mechanisms of the IPF that is mediated, at least in part, by TGF-beta1. The findings here show that 10(6) plaque-forming units (pfu) of AVTGFbeta1, provide essentially a 'no-effect' dose, but even this amount of TGF-beta1 causes a significant increase in whole-lung collagen by day 28 after treatment. In contrast, 10(8) and 10(9) pfu cause severe IPF in 4 days, whereas 10(7) and 5 x 10(7) are intermediate for all parameters studied, i.e. TGF-beta protein, inflammatory cells, cell proliferation, pro-alpha 1(I) collagen gene expression and whole-lung collagen accumulation, and expression of growth factors such as TGF-beta1, TNF-alpha and PDGF-A-and--B. Interestingly enough, TGF-beta1, as a potent blocker of epithelial cell proliferation, appears to suppress airway epithelial cell growth that would be expected during the inflammatory phase of IPF. Thus, this model system helps us to understand some quantitative aspects of TGF-beta1 biological activity and allows us to manipulate this potent factor as a mediator of interstitial fibrogenesis.
