Interactions between b-catenin and transforming-growth-factor-b signaling pathways mediate epithelial-mesenchymal transition and are dependent on the transcriptional co-activator cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP). Interactions between transforming-growth-factor-b (TGF-b) and Wnt are crucial to many biological processes, although specific targets, rationale for divergent outcomes (differentiation versus block of epithelial proliferation versus epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)) and precise mechanisms in many cases remain unknown. We investigated b-catenin-dependent and transforming-growth-factor-b1 (TGF-b1) interactions in pulmonary alveolar epithelial cells (AEC) in the context of EMT and pulmonary fibrosis. We previously demonstrated that ICG-001, a small molecule specific inhibitor of the b-catenin/CBP (but not b-catenin/p300) interaction, ameliorates and reverses pulmonary fibrosis and inhibits TGF-b1-mediated a-smooth-muscle-actin (a-SMA) and collagen induction in AEC. We now demonstrate that TGF-b1 induces LEF/TCF TOPFLASH reporter activation and nuclear b-catenin accumulation, while LiCl augments TGF-b-induced a-SMA expression, further confirming co-operation between b-catenin- and TGF-b-dependent signaling pathways. Inhibition and knockdown of Smad3, knockdown of b-catenin and overexpression of ICAT abrogated effects of TGF-b1 on a-SMA transcription/expression, indicating a requirement for b-catenin in these Smad3-dependent effects. Following TGF-b treatment, co-immunoprecipitation demonstrated direct interaction between endogenous Smad3 and b-catenin, while chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-re-ChIP identified spatial and temporal regulation of a-SMA via complex formation among Smad3, b-catenin, and CBP. ICG-001 inhibited a-SMA expression/transcription in response to TGF-b as well as a-SMA promoter occupancy by b-catenin and CBP, demonstrating a previously unknown requisite TGF-b1/b-catenin/CBP-mediated pro-EMT signaling pathway. Clinical relevance was shown by b-catenin/Smad3 co-localization and CBP expression in AEC of IPF patients. These findings suggest a new therapeutic approach to pulmonary fibrosis by specifically uncoupling CBP/catenin-dependent signaling downstream of TGF-b.
