Control of virus reactivation arrests pulmonary herpesvirus-induced fibrosis in IFN-gamma receptor-deficient mice. RATIONALE: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic progressive fibrotic lung disorder of unknown cause. Several studies suggest an association between Epstein-Barr virus pulmonary infection and the development of IPF. OBJECTIVES: To determine whether reduction of gamma-herpesvirus reactivation from latency would alter progressive lung fibrogenesis in an animal model of virus-induced pulmonary fibrosis. METHODS: IFN-gamma receptor-deficient (IFN-gammaR(-/-)) mice infected intranasally with murine gamma-herpesvirus 68 (MHV68) develop lung fibrosis that progresses for up to at least 180 days after initial infection. Viral replication during the chronic phase of infection was controlled by two methods: the administration of cidofovir, an antiviral drug effective at clearing lytic but not latent virus, and by using a mutant gamma-herpesvirus defective in virus reactivation from latency. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Ten percent of the asymptomatic MHV68-infected animals that received antiviral treatment beginning on Day 45 postinfection had severe pulmonary fibrosis compared with 40% of the control saline-treated animals. Absence of severe fibrosis was also observed in IFN-gammaR(-/-) mice infected with the defective reactivation mutant MHV68 v-cyclin stop. Decreased fibrosis was associated with lower levels of transforming growth factor-beta, vascular endothelial growth factor, and markers of macrophage alternative activation. When antiviral treatment was administered on Day 60 in symptomatic animals, survival improved from 20 to 80% compared with untreated symptomatic animals, but lung fibrosis persisted in 60% of the mice. CONCLUSIONS: MHV68-induced fibrosis is a result of viral lytic replication during chronic lung herpesvirus infection in mice. We speculate that antiviral therapy might help to control lung fibrosis in humans with IPF and associated herpesvirus infection.